The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Collection of Seven and Fifty approved
Receipts Good against the Plague, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Collection of Seven and Fifty approved Receipts Good against the Plague

Author: Unknown

Release Date: March 30, 2020 [EBook #61703]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTION OF SEVEN AND FIFTY RECEIPTS ***




Produced by Brian Wilsden and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
made using scans of public domain works put online by
Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program.)





TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




[Illustration: Book Cover.]

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE.

The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the
public domain.

    A
    COLLECTION
    OF
    Seven and Fifty approved
    RECEIPTS
    Good againſt the
    PLAGUE.

    Taken out of the Five Books of that Renowned
    D^r. _DON ALEXES_ Secrets, for the benefit of
    the poorer ſort of people of theſe Nations.

    By _W. J._ Gent.

  [Illustration]

    _LONDON_,

    Printed by _Peter Lillicrap_, for _John Wingfield_ at the Bible
    and Anchor in Tower-street near Mark-lane end.

    1665.




[Illustration]




The Author to the

READER.


  Courteous Reader,

[Illustration: I] _through Gods divine providence, have had at ſeveral
times, great occaſion to make uſe of Medicines for the health of my own
body, as namely in the year 1642, for Cuts and Shots, where then I came
acquainted, and into familiarity with Maſter_ George Dunne _Chyrurgion,
Maſter_ Leadbeater _the Apothecary, Maſter_ Guye, _Maſter_ Hicks, _and
Maſter_ Nicholas Culpepper, _by whoſe familiarity I loſt nothing, in
the end of _September 1663_ our houſe was viſited with the Plague,
one died before we knew what it was, the family was five in number, I
lay in the ſame bedding the deceaſed dyed out of, he dyed full of the
marks, I had a Boyle in my Groyne that never brake, but went away by
purging and vomiting, my fellow had one that brake, yet none dyed but
the firſt, I helpt to Coffin about ſix perſons, in one family at that
time, yet by Gods providence am yet alive, in the year 1649, I had
a long ſickneſs from_ Midſomer _till_ Chriſtmas, _of that miſerable
diſeaſe called the griping or plague of the Guts, which cauſed me to
ſearch all publick means for cure, and having ſpent what means I had
upon Doctors like the woman that had the bloudy Iſſue: And all gave
me over for dead, I betook me to ſearch for directions in books, and
after the reading of many providence guided me to light upon the moſt
excellent and approved Works of that famous Doctor named_ DON ALEXES,
_a man well ſkilled in the Latine Greek, Hebrew Chaldes and Arabick
tongues, and of divers other Nations and Countreys, he being naturally
inclined and took a ſingular pleaſure in Phyloſophy, and in the ſecrets
of nature, he travelled ſeven and twenty years to gain knowledge, the
five books were tranſlated into Engliſh by Maſter_ William Ward _and
Maſter_ Richard Andrews _and Dedicated unto the Right honourable_
Francis _Lord_ Ruſſell _Earl of_ Bedford, _but leſt I ſhould make my
Porch greater then my building, I do refer thoſe that would be further
ſatisfied, unto thoſe five books aforeſaid, where they ſhall finde
every one inſerted, I gathered them at firſt for my own perticular
private uſe, but conſidering the ſcarcity of the books and altogether
at an extraordinary dear rate, I have for the publick benefit of all
men expoſed them to the care of the Printer to ſerve for publick uſe_.

  June 12,
  1665.

  W. J.




[Illustration]




A Collection of Seven and fifty Receipts good againſt the Plague.




    CONTENTS.
    Chapter.                                                     Page
              _Introduction._                            Introduction

          1.  _An approved Remedy againſt the Peſtilence be it
               never ſo vehement._                                  1

          2.  _A very good perfume againſt the Plague._             1

          3.  _Another very good Remedy againſt the Plague._        1

          4.  _For him that is ſick of the Plague._                 1

          5.  _A marvellous preſervative againſt the Plague._       1

          6.  _An approved good ointment to make an Impoſtume
               break and the Plague ſore to fall off._              1

          7.  _Another remedy againſt the Plague._                  1

          8.  _Another very good Remedy againſt the Plague._        1

          9.  _Another perfect Receipt againſt the Plague._         1

          10. _Another againſt the Plague._                         1

          11. _A thing often experimented againſt the Plague._      1

          12. _A preſervative againſt the Plague proved
               oftentimes._                                         1

          13. _Another._                                            1

          14. _In a ſuſpect time of the Plague._                    1

          15. _Another moſt excellent Medicine good againſt
               the Plague._                                         1

          16. _A rare and perfect ſecret againſt the Plague._       1

          17. _Another very rare approved Receipt._                 1

          18. _To make a Carbuncle and all other Botches
               Impoſtumes and Plague ſores to break, a preſent
               remedy and very aſie to be made._                    1

          19. _A very good Remedy againſt the Marks of the
               Plague commonly called Gods marks or God tokens._    1

          20. _Againſt the mortality of the Peſtilence an
               approved remedy._
                                  1
          21. _To make little round balls good againſt the
               Plague._                                             1

          22. _A very perfect oyl againſt the Plague and all
               manner of poyſon._                                   1

          23. _A marvelous ſecret for to preſerve a man from
               the Plague._                                          1

          24. _A very ſure and perfect remedy to cure a man of
               the Peſtilence._                                     1

          25. _A preſent remedy to heal the Peſtilence by
               drawing out the venome from the ſore approved._      1

          26. _How to make balls to ſmell to in time of the
               Plague._                                             1

          27. _An excellent perfume for a chamber in the time
               of a Plague or Peſtilence._                          1

          28. _Againſt the Plague._                                 1

          29. _Another againſt the Plague._                         1

          30. _A preſervative in time of Peſtilence, and
               againſt all venome or poyſon, and againſt the
               biting of a mad Dog._                                1

          31. _An approved compoſition as well to preſerve as
               to heal, very good in the time of a contagious
               Plague._                                             1

          32. _Another moſt excellent Compoſition, and a very
               good preſervative againſt the Peſtilence often
               tried and experienced._                              1

          33. _Another compoſition in powder, but in another
               manner for the ſame purpoſe._                        1

          34. _Common Pills very good for the ſame._                1

          35. _Antidotes or Medicines, and comfortable
               preſervative of ſmall coſt eaſie to find that
               poor people may prepare for themſelves._             1

          36. _Another rare Medicine._                              1

          37. _It is requiſite to ſpeak ſomething of a ſavour
               and ſweet ſmell; as powders balls waters and
               perfumes, and firſt of a powder and firſt of a
               powder for many purpoſes._                           1

          38. _Another ſweet ſmelling ball._                        1

          39. _Another ſweet ball more ſweet for the ſummer._       1

          40. _Of five outward Remedies, to purge the Aire, the
               preſenteſt and eaſieſt and of ſmalleſt price for
               perſons low in eſtate and condition._                1

          41. _Eight Cauſions for the whole ſum of governing of
               mans body eſpecially in the time of the Plague._     1

          42. _A ſoverain powder againſt the venome of the Plague,
               fit for Princes and Rich people._                    1

          43. _How to make a powder for the poorer ſort of people._ 1

          44. _How with little coſt to make a drink for the poor._  1

          45. _A drink that hath been proved good againſt the
               Plague._                                             1

          46. _How opiate is made._                                 1

          47. _How to make a drink meat after the taking of
               Opiate, or to be mixed with the Opiate for the
               ſtrongeſt or meaneſt men according to the time
               and place._                                          1

          48. _How to make a good drink for the poor._              1

          49. _How to make a drink to cauſe one to ſweat._          1

          50. _How to make a drink eaſie for the poor of
               low price._                                          1

          51. _How to provoke ſweat and heal the Plague._           1

          52. _An excellent preſervative againſt the Plague._       1

          53. _Another againſt the Plague._                         1

          54. _How to make another preſervative againſt the
               Plague._                                             1

          55. _Another preſervative againſt the Plague._            1

          56. _How to make a good water againſt the Plague
               or Surfeite._                                        1

          57. _How to purifie the Air in a Plague time._            1




CHAP. 1.

  _An approved Remedy againſt the Peſtilence be it never ſo
  vehement._


Take an Ounion and cut him overthwart, then make a little hole in each
peece, the which you ſhall fill with fine Triacle, then ſet the pieces
together again as they were before, then wrap them in a white linnen
cloth. Putting it ſo to Roaſt in the Embers and Aſhes, then when it is
Roaſted enough preſs out all the juice of it: and give the patient a
ſpoonful thereof to drink, and ſo by Gods help he ſhall feel eaſe and
moſt undoubtedly be healed.




CHAP. 2.

  _A very good perfume againſt the Plague._


Take Maſtick, Cyprus, Incence, Mace, Wormwood, Mirrhe, Lignum Aloe,
Tegname Muſk, Ambergreiſe, Timioma, Nutmugges, Mirtle-tree, Bay-tree,
Roſemary, Saige, Roſes, Elder, Cloves, Juniper, Rue, Pitch, and a kind
of Raw-pitch, called in Latine _Raſiſe_, ſtamp all theſe together mixe
them well ſet them on the embers, or Coles and ſo perfume the Chamber.




CHAP. 3.

  _Another very good Remedy againſt the Plague._


Take the Ripe berries of a Bay-tree, then pill off the black ſkin that
is upon them, beat them into powder with a little Salt, and as ſoon
as the party perceiveth himſelf infected with the Plague, and that he
begin to have a hot Fevor, he muſt take a ſpoonful of the ſaid powder,
mixt with a little Vineger and water, let him heat it a little and
drinke it, and then covering himſelf warm ſleep, ſleeping ſoundly by
Gods help he ſhall be cured in a ſhort time, but if the Fevor come with
a cold, inſtead of Vineger he muſt take wine, and then do as is ſaid
before, this hath been experimented on many in the laſt great Plague
time.




CHAP. 4.

  _For him that is ſick of the Plague._


Take white Dittany, Turmentill, white Corall, Genitine, Bole Armoniack,
Terra ſigilata, and Endive, water of Scabius, and the Accedent coming
upon him, this muſt be made at leaſt four hours before it be uſed, take
of the ſaid things ſtamped each one by it ſelf, and put them ſeverally
in glaſſes, and make of all of them a drink at your own diſcretion,
making the Vineger mount in the glaſs a little above the other things,
and let the patient take it hot, covering himſelf hot in his bed untill
he ſweat, and by Gods help he ſhall undoubtedly be Cured.




CHAP. 5.

  _A marvellous preſervative againſt the Plague._


To make this take white Ditany, round Ariſtolochia, with Crocodilium
otherwiſe called Cardina, or Cordua, with Voruine, Gentian, Zeduariſe,
an hearb called in _Latine_, _pes midi_, of each of them two Ounces,
ſtamp all theſe together with a Handful of Rue, then take a glaſs that
holdeth at leaſt three quarts, and fill it with the beſt wine you can
find, whereinto you ſhall put all the foreſaid things, and let it
ſtand ſo in your houſe, and in dangerous times take every morning a
glaſs full of the ſaid wine before you go out of your houſe, but firſt
obſerve to eat a Walnut a Fige and a branch or two of Rue, do this
every morning.




CHAP. 6.

  _An approved good ointment to make an Impoſtume break and
  the Plague ſore to fall off._


To make this take a quantity of Oyl of Olive and ſet it on the fire in
ſome firme veſſel, put thereto fine Cerus or White Lead well ſtamped
together, literage of ſilver very fine and thine, with a quantity of
Common wax, ſet it on the fire untill you may ſpread it with your
finger upon a ſmooth ſtone, then take it from the fire and power a
little Vineger upon it, but have a care of your face, then make a
Plaiſter of this ointment, as big as all the ſore, and make a hole in
the midſt thereof the breadth of a penny, make then a little plaiſter
of ſuppling ointment the bigneſs of the hole, then make another
plaiſter of the ſame bigneſs, and lay it on the ſuppling plaiſter, the
mortifying plaiſter be between both, let this lye twenty four hours,
then change onely the middle plaiſter, letting it ſo lye twenty four
hours longer, but remember to annoint the top of the ſore with ſome
Hogs ſuite, or Hen or Capons greaſe to mollifie it, ſo it will be hard
in the middle, and round about it will be tender fleſh, in ſuch ſort
that the ſore will break and come forth about the end of forty and
eight hours, take of the foreſaid plaiſters, and lay upon it another
plaiſter made with freſh Hogs greaſe, then will the dead fleſh fall out
with the core, like unto a round half Ball, but the hole will remain
which you muſt dreſs with healing ointment, you muſt ſtrow burnt Alum
beaten to powder to eat the dead or rather proud fleſh away.




CHAP. 7.

  _Another remedy againſt the Plague._


Take the topes of Rue a Garlick-head, or half a quarter of a Walnut,
and a corn of Salt, eat this every morning continuing ſo a moneth
together, this is alſo good againſt the worms both in young and old.




CHAP. 8.

  _Another very good Remedy againſt the Plague._


Take a quantity of the water of wilde Purſley, called in Greek
_Meliſſophillon_, _Melephilo_, and _Melenon_, and in Latine
_Apiaſtrum_, with Plantine water, of each of theſe a like quantity in
ſeveral glaſſes, take daily of this mixing equall quantities together
in a ſmall glaſs, and then you ſhall drink thereof, ſo by the bleſſing
of God you ſhall be preſerved and keept ſafe from the infection of
the Plague, this water is alſo good for Fiſtula's and hath been often
proved true by experience.




CHAP. 9.

  _Another perfect Receipt againſt the Plague._


Fill a Glaſs a third part full of fine Triacle, and one third part with
Aquavitæ, and fill the other third part with the Urine of a man childe
that is a virgin and healthfull mixe all theſe well together, and give
the patient to drink a glaſs full three mornings one after another,
this was proved in _Venice_ in the year 1504 and in _London_ in the
laſt great Plague.




CHAP. 10.

  _Another againſt the Plague._


As ſoon as the party feeleth himſelf infected, let him ſwallow a
quantity of the beſt Triacle, then take of the ſame Triacle the bigneſs
of a Cheſnut, and lay it on the ſore that beginneth to riſe, rubbing it
well round about with the ſame Triacle, then immediately take a young
Pegion and cut him in the midſt quick feathers and all, lay him to the
ſore warm as he is in his feathers, let him lye till that part of the
Pegion become green, and the Triacle red, then take it off, and you
ſhall perceive, that out of the Pegion will come a green water, which
is all the venome that was in the ſore, then cure the place with this
following plaiſter, take two parts of freſh Barrows  greaſe, and one
part of Wormwood well ſtamped and lay it upon the ſore and the effect
followeth.




CHAP. 11.

  _A thing often experimented againſt the Plague._


Take two Ounces of Maſtick, one Ounce of Euphorbium, five Ounces of
Spignard, beat theſe into powder and give it the patient to drink, if
he be under ten years of age give him but a Scruple of it, if betwixt
ten and twenty years of age give him half a dram, if above twenty years
old give him a dram, then take the hearb called in Greek Pentaphylon,
in Latine Quinque folium, in Engliſh Cinkfoil, and wrap it like a round
Apple in a linnen cloath lay it ſo under the embers a certain time, and
having taken it out, cut it in three pieces in the middle, and lay it
upon the ſore, this will give immediate eaſe unto the patient proved
and experimented many times.




CHAP. 12.

  _A preſervative againſt the Plague proved oftentimes._


In a dangerous time take three branches of Rue, a Walnut and a Fig, eat
all this and your ſtomach ſhall be fenced againſt Infection.




CHAP. 13.

  _Another._


Take Vineger, the juce of a white Ounion, the juce of Rue and of
Milfoil, Yarrow, or Noſe-bleed, of each of them alike quantity mixe
all together, and give the patient a glaſs full very hot, but let it
be before the ſixth hour after the pain hath taken him, then make him
ſweat in a warm bed, this hath been an approved remedy.




CHAP. 14.

  _In a ſuſpect time of the Plague._


Take Pennirial with Suger Ruſſet, make an Electuary, eat the bigneſs of
a Cheſnut at breakfaſt this hath been proved and found good.




CHAP. 15.

_Another moſt excellent Medicine good againſt the Plague._


Take Walnuts that are green tender and good to Confecture, or
Preſerves, put them in Vineger the ſpace of eight days, then take them
out again, and break them in pieces, then put them into the Limbeck,
without Vineger, and ſtill the water of them; the patient ſhall drink
every day a ſmall half glaſs full and after drinking of this potion,
let him ſweat well in his bed.




CHAP. 16.

  _A rare and perfect ſecret againſt the Plague._


Take an Ounce of Aloes Epaticum, half an Ounce of Mirrhe, half an Ounce
of Saforne beaten into powder, ſift the Aloes and Mirrhe together, then
ſteep and ſoake the Saforne, or waſh it with White wine that is very
ſtrong, ſo that it be like ſauce, put then the other powder to it, and
mixe all well together, if need require you may put more Wine to it ſo
make thereof a paſte, and ſo make pills of the ſame, but if you will
have it very ſtrong put to every Ounce half an Ounce of Diagridum and
half an Ounce of Camphire, Mr. _Francis Albert_ took three eight parts
of the ſaid pills without Diagridum, ſoaking them in good Wine and gave
them to his patient as ſoon as he could and cauſed him to ſweat much in
his bed and by ſweating diſolved the venome.




CHAP. 17.

  _Another very rare approved Receipt._


Take the flowers or bloſoms of Walnuts, dry them in the ſhadow, and
when the nuts be in ſeaſon to confect, you ſhall cut part of them into
ſmall pieces, putting the ſame into ſmall Vineger for three days, then
take them out and mingle flowers diſtilling them through a Limbeck of
glaſs, or of earth, well leaded, keep this water diligently, and when
any man feeleth himſelf infected with the Plague, give preſently to him
two Ounces or three Ounces more or leſs as the party is in years or
ſtrength, and he ſhall looſe his diſeaſe by ſtoole or by vomit, or elſe
it will force the ſore to come forth, which you may ripen and break and
draw forth the core and ſo heal the ſame as is before declared.




CHAP. 18.

  _To make a Carbuncle and all other Botches Impoſtumes and
  Plague ſores to break, a preſent remedy and very eaſie to
  be made._


Take bay Salt well beaten into powder and ſerced, incorporate it with
the yolk of an Egge then lay it on the Carbuncle or ſore, and be you
aſſured that by Gods grace it will take away all the venome and poyſon
of the Plague ſore, ſo that in ſhort time he ſhall be cured; this
Remedy hath been often proved.




CHAP. 19.

  _A very good Remedy againſt the Marks of the plague
  commonly called Gods marks or God tokens._


Take freſh and green Rhopenticum, which is the hearb and root called
Themore or great Centory, it is named of _Pliny_, as _Bulius_ doth
write (_Rhacoma_) with the roots of the hearb called _Sanguinaria
dactillon_, of ſome _Dens Canis_, of _Dioſcordious_ it is called
_Coronopus_, that is to ſay Crows foot, ſome take it to be Dandelion,
take therewith the roots of Turmiltill, and white Dittany, of each of
theſe an Ounce, ſtamp all well then put them in a pot or violl with
clear water at your diſcretion, rather too much then too little, till
it paſs three handfulls above the other things in the pot; then boyle
it with a clear fire without ſmoak, untill one third part be deminiſhed
then ſtrain it ſoftly into a clean glaſs and it will be of the colour
of wine, when neceſſity doth require you may give the patient a glaſs
full in the morning and another at night two hours before ſupper,
but it muſt be very hot, then cover him well in his bed and make
him ſweat, when the Marks come forth he ſhall become like a Lazer or
a Lepper and by Gods bleſſing ſhall recover in a ſhort time and be
perfectly whole.




CHAP. 20.

  _Againſt the mortality of the Peſtilence an approved
  remedy._


Take Gentian, Seduaria, roots of Turmentille of each of them two Ounces,
Red Sandal, white and Recent, Ditany, Harts horn burnd, white pearl,
bole Armoniack round Ariſtolochia, of each of them an Ounce, half an
Ounce of Camphere, two Ounces of white Suger: of all theſe things
beaten together into powder you ſhall take at every time a dram with
three Ounces as Endive water, or Sorrell water, mixe the water and the
Suger with the bigneſs of a Walnut of fine Triacle, you muſt miniſter
this Medicine before the ſickneſs have continued with the perſon twelve
hours for it is the ſurer, if the patient be an infant then give him
but half a dram of it with an Ounce and a half of one of the ſaid
waters, and with the like quantity of Triacle, this drink is neither
ſolvable nor laxative, nor doth cauſe any grief to the patient but
onely killeth the poyſon, if any perſon have drunk or eaten any poyſon
it is a very good Medicine for him, it is alſo very good againſt a hot
fevor or Ague, note alſo that if it be poſſible the patient muſt be let
bloud before he take this or ſuddenly after.




CHAP. 21.

  _To make little round balls good againſt the Plague._


Take of Labdanum, half an Ounce, Storax Calamica one Ounce, Diambre,
two grains of Camphere, fifteen grains of Cloves, Nutmukes and Mace of
each of them an eight part, a ſcruple of Damaſk Roſes, half a dram of
Cinamon, fifteen grains of Spignard, Muſk and Civit, of each of them
eight grains half a dram of fine Violets, four grains of Lignum Aloes
the bigneſs of a bean of Calomie Aromanticie, four grains of fine
Amber, the bigneſs of a bean of Mirrhe, firſt ſtamp the Labdanum with
a hot Peſtle, then ſtamp well the Storax Calatimæ, and all the other
things each by it ſelf and then mixe all together and ſtamp them ſtill
with a peſtle ading to it at every time Storax laquide and Roſe water
untill all the ſaid things be well incorporated, and then make round
balls thereof to ſmell to or uſe at your own diſcretion.




CHAP. 22.

  _A very perfect oyl Againſt the Plague and all manner of
  poyſon._


Take of the oldeſt oyl you can get, and boyl it the ſpace of an hour,
and for every pound of the ſaid oyl put in fifty Scorpions or as many
as you can get, put all this in a pot uncovered ſet the pot in a Kettle
of boyling water untill the third part of the oyl or ſomewhat leſs be
conſumed, then take out the Scorpions and ſtrain the oyl into another
pot, then ſtop it cloſe, and ſet it in the Sun three moneths, or by the
fire on hot Aſhes the ſpace of four days, but firſt put in two Ounces
of Unicorns horn, one Ounce of Triacle, three Ounces of Aquavitæ, when
any perſon feeleth himſelf infected with the Plague or poyſon let him
be annointed with the ſaid oyl about the heart and pulſes and he ſhall
finde a marvelous effect.




CHAP. 23.

_A marvelous ſecret for to preſerve a man from the Plague and hath been
proved in_ England _of all the Phyſicians in that great and vehement
Plague in the year 1348, and in the year 1625 in_ London, _that in the
year 1348 crept throughout all the known world, and Authors affirm that
there was never any perſon that uſed this ſecret but was by Gods grace
preſerved from the Plague_.


Take Aloe Epaticum, or Cicotrim, fine Cinamon, of each of theſe three
drams, Cloves, Mace Lignum Aloe, Maſtick, bole Armoniake of each of
them half a dram, let all theſe things be well ſtamped together in a
Morter, then mingle them together, then keep it in a cloſe veſſel, and
take thereof every morning two penny weight in half a glaſſfull of
white wine, with a little water, drink it in the morning at the dawning
of the day, and ſo you may by the grace of God go hardily into all
infection of the Aire and receive no damage by the Plague.




CHAP. 24.

  _A very ſure and perfect remedy to cure a man of the
  Peſtilence._


Take the berries of Ivie, that groweth on trees or walls, and not of
them that are found on the ground, you muſt gather the ſaid berries
very ripe and toward the north if it be poſſible if not take them as
you can get them; although they be not very ripe, dry them in the
ſhadow and keep them in a wooden box as a moſt precious thing, and if
any be infected with the Peſtilence, beat the ſaid berries to powder
in a clean Morter, and give the patient the ſaid powder in a glaſſfull
of white wine, as much as will lye upon a groat or more; then cover
him in his bed and cauſe him to ſweat, then change his ſhirt, ſheets
and all the coverings of his bed if it be poſſible, if not at leaſt
change ſhirt and ſheets, ſome having taken this over night have found
themſelves well in the morning, and cured.

My Author affirmeth that in the year 1523 he ſaw in _Aleppo Amilanos_
that had two Plague ſores one under his thigh and another under his
left arm, and having taken the ſaid powder morning and evening he found
that the ſaid ſores brake of themſelves by virtue of this excellent
Medicine, ſent and bleſt by God himſelf who giveth underſtanding unto
man, it is good for all perſons to have ſo eaſie a thing ready by them.




CHAP. 25.

  _A preſent remedy to heal the Peſtilence by drawing out
  the venome from the ſore approved._


Take a quick Hen and pluck the Rump and place where ſhe layeth egges
quite bare, then ſet her ſo that the bare place may be upon the grief,
that ſhe may be held upon the ſore, a great while the Hen draweth all
the poyſon to her ſelf, or at leaſt ſo much as will eaſe the patient,
ſhortly after ſhe will dye, you may do this with three or four ſeveral
Hens immediately one after another they will draw all the venome from
the ſore, then anoint the place with good Triacle uſing the Ivie and
bay berries and other remedies before deſcribed to break draw and heal
the ſore.




CHAP. 26.

  _How to make balls to ſmell to in time of the Plague._


Take one part of Storax one part of Libdany halfe a part of Cloves,
ſum Camphere, Aquavitæ of Spignard, ſum Nutmukes of all theſe make a
paſte with Roſe water wherein you muſt diſolve ſum Gum dragon and Gum
Araback, work them well together, make of this balls to hold in your
hands to ſmell at.




CHAP. 27.

  _An excellent perfume for a chamber in the time of a
  Plague or Peſtilence._


Take of Storax, Calamica, Bengewine, Lignie, Aloes, of each an Ounce,
five Ounces of Coals of Willow beaten into powder, mixe theſe things
with Aquavitæ, as much as will make them into a paſte, make thereof
little Cakes or what forms you pleaſe, and ſo keep them, when you uſe
them put a little of them on a Chafing diſh and in conſuming them by
little and little they will make a ſingular good Odour in the place
where you burn the ſame.




CHAP. 28.

  _Againſt the Plague._


Take three Ounces of the Liquor of the inner rinde of an Aſh tree and
ſtill it with three Ounces of white Wine, give the patient to drink of
it every three hours and by Gods help within twenty four hours he ſhall
be well.




CHAP. 29.

  _Another againſt the Plague._


Take three Ounces of Walnuts that be not yet full ripe, prepared and
diſtilled at Midſomer, and let the patient drink thereof and he ſhall
be whole, but it will be better to take the outward pills of Walnuts in
_September_ when they be black, ſo that they be not rotten, and diſtill
them and give the patient a glaſſfull thereof to drink very warm he
being let blood this will help him much.




CHAP. 30.

  _A preſervative in time of Peſtilence, and againſt all
  venome or poyſon, and againſt the biting of a mad Dog._


If you eat before meals a Walnut or two, two dry Figs, and ſome
leaves of Garden Rue with a corn of Salt, it will be a great and good
preſervative againſt the Plague, and againſt all poyſon that a man
eateth, the ſame being ſtamped and laid to the byting of a mad Dog it
healeth it, ſo do Nutmukes work the like effect.




CHAP. 31.

  _An approved compoſition as well to preſerve as to heal,
  very good in the time of a contagious Plague._


Take an Ounce of the beſt Triacle, half an Ounce of the juce of Lemons,
a Scruple of Saforne, a little of the two ſorts of Pearls, Red Corall
and Sorrell ſeed, of each half a dram, two grains of Camphere, mingle
all theſe together very well with two or three drops of Odeferious
white wine, and make thereof an ointment, ſpread a quantity thereof
upon a piece of Crimſon ſilke lay this hot upon the patients heart and
remove it morning and evening.




CHAP. 32.

  _Another moſt excellent Compoſition, and a very good
  preſervative againſt the Peſtilence often tried and
  experienced._


Take a Pimpernell dried an ounce and a half of Sordii Veti, ſome
Roots of Gentian, Imparatory, Zedoariæ, of each ſix drams, Calamint
Apiaſtrum, or Citraginie, Enuly Campanie Roots Tormentille, which
is a kind of Cinkfoile, Bay berries the ſeed of Cardus Benedictus,
which is one of the kinds of the herb called Atriactilie, with an
Oringe of Citron, Oxiladis, which is a kind of Sorrell, bole Armoniack
prepared of each three Drachmes Lickoriſh ſcraped, Clycaniſie Seminis
the ſeeds of Scatiola, which is Mubus Sativa, of the kinds of Endive
and Succory, Cinamonie, exquiſitie, of each two drams Gilli-flowers,
Red Roſes and Coriander, prepared, the ſeed of Baſill, Cortiſis Citrie
Fixie, Santuly luteie vel raboi Agalochi, that is Xilaloe Ligni Aloes,
the ſcraping of Ivory and red Coral, Pearls of each a dram and a
half, and two Scruples of Saforne beat all theſe very ſmall mingle
them with Sugar of equall quantity, or elſe with Oxemelite, or Sirupo
aceratoe, or Oxyfacchata, or rather the ſirrup of Lemons, but for weak
ſtomacks make like to Lickquid confection, either, Opiate vel Maſſee,
or elſe let there be an Electuary pertabellas of a dram weight, or
four ſcruples, then adde unto every ounce or Suger, a dram of the
ſaid powder, then take thereof two or three hours before your meals,
if it be in powder take a dram or half a dram at the leaſt, with ſome
convenient liquor of thoſe which are now named if it be opiate, the
quantity or a Cheſtnut or a Walnut if it be in form of a maſs and thick
make two or three pills or more very ſoft for to take at one time
drinking after the ſame ſum of the Liquors already mentioned when it is
in little tablits you may take one or two or more at your diſcretion.




CHAP. 33.

  _Another compoſition in powder, but in another manner for
  the ſame purpoſe._


Take the Roots of Angilica, Gentian, Zedoaria, of the roots of
Tormentille the ſeeds of Coxalidas Citrie Mallie, Cinamon, elect with
a kind of Caſia of yellow or red Sandal or Sanders Cardus Benedictus
of each two drams, a dram and a half of Oringe Pills, one dram of the
ſcrapings of Ivory, half a dram of red Corrall the like weight of fine
Sugar, put to all theſe things as the powder ſhall ſeem pleaſant and
good, or if you will ſeek another way as is ſpoken of in the firſt
preſervative, as concerning the quantity of this compoſition, at every
time, and the time of uſing it let it be as the other before, but if
you will have them both let them not be of a like ſort, but the one
being in powder in tablits the other in Opiat, or maſs, with pills.




CHAP. 34.

  _Common Pills very good for the ſame._


Take Aloes probæ, and Lote, two ounces, one ounce of Saforne, one
ounce of good Mirrhe, or elſe Mirrhe and Ammoniacum, diſolved in white
wine of each half an ounce, mixe them together with hony Roſet, but in
winter you may put Zedoaria, Agallochi, or Red Sandis of each of them
a dram, but in ſummer take away the Mirrhe and Amoniacum and put to
it bole Armoniacke prepared three drams, half a dram of Red Corrall
with a ſcruple of Camphere to take commonly a pill or two before your
meals, ſometimes a dram after your firſt ſleep as you ſhall prove by
experience.




CHAP. 35.

  _Antidotes or Medicines, and comfortable preſervative of
  ſmall coſt eaſie to find that poor people may prepare for
  themſelves._


1. Take Garlick and drink a little wine after it, or a Fig with a
Walnut and Rue and a little ſalt ſpecially in winter. 2. Take twenty
leaves of Rue with two Walnuts and as many Figs and a grain of Salt
all being mixt together receive it in the morning. 3. Take ſix
leaves of Rue with Vineger. 4. Take the Root of the herb called in
Latine Imperatora, of ſum Laſcopitium, Gallicum. 5. Take the Root of
Angelica. 6. The Roots of Gentian. 7. The Root of Zedarie. 8. Of Cardus
Benedictus. 9. Of Garlina. 10. Take the herb called Scordium in ſmall
powder the quantity of a dram, either in a ſoft maſs made with ſodden
honey and vineger, or with ſome ſirrup as of Lemons or in Opiat the
bigneſs of a Cheſnut, or of a ſmall Peaſe with wine in winter, in
ſummer with Roſe water, or with the juce of Sorrell. 11. Sorrell alone
or with Pimpernell in Vineger and drink of it in the morning. 12. Or
the juce of them wherewith you may make a taſte in ſummer. 13. Or
Juniper berries, the leaves of green Pimpernell of Bittany of Pulegion
of Sorrell of each a like quantity brayed together and ſodden in honey,
put thereto a little Vineger like a conſerve.




CHAP. 36.

  _Another rare Medicine._


Take Juniper berries, bole Armoniack, of each two drams or of both
alike quantity being ſtamped lay it in ſweet oyl and Vineger or in
Oxmillite, in the mean form either Opiat or maſs. If it be Opiat take
as much as a Cheſtnut, if it be Maſs take one great Pill, and drink
after it a little Hidromill or Oximill or wine.




CHAP. 37.

  _It is requiſite to ſpeak ſomething of a ſavour and ſweet
  ſmell; as powders balls waters and perfumes, and firſt of
  a powder for many purpoſes._


Take four ounces of Iviſe Florientiana, of Margrom Cloves and Red Roſes
of each an ounce of Milliſſophilie, Nuciſe Odoratee or Muſcate Zedorie,
Cinamon Agallochi, yellow, Sanders, Maſtick Storax Calamita and
Bengroin, half an ounce of each, and two ſcruples of Juncus odoratus,
Calami odoravie, Syici Nardiradiciſe one dram of each.

Make of theſe a powder to ſmell, to be beaten or broken, in ſome piece
of fine ſilke or a peece of fine linnen cloth, beat all theſe things
groſly for to perfume and waſh your head and beard, or let them lye a
time in white wine and Roſe water, and ſtrain them, keeping the water
to uſe when you pleaſe, or you may ſtill them in a double veſſel,
that they may be Aqua Aromatica, this being laid upon the coals is to
perfume your chamber twice every day morning and evening, it is good
alſo to wear about you or to put in a little bag and lay it amongſt
linnen or woollen cloathes.




CHAP. 38.

  _Another ſweet ſmelling ball._


Take two ounces of pure Labdanum, one ounce and a half of Bengroine
one ounce of Willow coals of Storax Calamita, ſix drams, two drams, a
peece of Marjoram, and yellow or red Sanders, of red Roſes and Calainus
Aramaticus, two ſcruples a peece, then take ſix drams of oyl of ſweet
Almonds and as much of Bengroin, with half an ounce of Storax Calamita
ſithe theſe things together then put thereto ſix drams of Roſe water.
Then ſtrain it, and let that which is ſtrained, be ſoft made with two
ounces of white wax, and put to it of Storax liquida, one dram, make
it like as Cereatum, or plaiſter incorporate theſe together with a hot
peſtle putting thereto a dram and a half of muſk.




CHAP. 39.

  _Another ſweet ball more ſweet for the ſummer._


Take three ounces and a half a peece of Roſes and Violets with an ounce
a peece of the berries and leaves of Mirtle, and the coals of Willow,
ſix drams a peece, of Juniper berries and Oringe pills, two drams of
red Sanders, one dram of Bengroin with two ſcruples of Camphere, make
a powder of theſe, then take an ounce and a half of oyl of Roſes, with
two drams a peece of Storax Calamita, and Bengroine, with an ounce of
Roſe water with two ounces of white wax, beat all the reſt together
with a hot peſtle, put to it a little muſk and uſe it.




CHAP. 40.

  _Of five outward Remedies, to purge the Aire, the
  preſenteſt and eaſieſt and of ſmalleſt price for perſons
  low in eſtate and condition._


Firſt take Juniper berries with ſome of the root cloven aſunder and
dried with ſome of the forementioned drugs and make thereof a perfume
this is good to purge the Air. Secondly, ſprinkle your Chamber with
Vineger alone or mixed with Roſe water. Thirdly, when you are to go
out into company, put into your mouth the Pill or ſeed of a Cittorn,
or Cinamon, or Cloves or the Roots of Angelica, or Zedoarie or ſuch as
are before mentioned, hold theſe in your mouth and chaw them for you
ſhall finde that they will give a good odour. Fourthly, if you deſire
to ſmell to a ſpunge or to a Hancherchief both day and night, Malmſey
or other ſtrong wine and ſweet; ſuch as are Muſcadell alone or elſe
with Roſe water, wherein there hath been tempered ſome Aromaticall drug
already ſpoken of, and alſo Cloves and Nutmukes, are very good for this
purpoſe. Fifthly, if it be in ſummer take a little Camphere, with a
little cold water and twice ſo much Vineger, this is alſo very good.




CHAP. 41.

  _Eight Cauſions for the whole ſum of governing of mans
  body eſpecially in the time of the Plague._


1. It is neceſſary that you keep every thing neat and clean in your
houſe often waſhing and cleanſing the ſame, and that as much as in you
lyeth you do avoid going into all evil Aire. 2. Be ſure that you flye
all exceſs of Riot and ſuperfluity of intemperate eating and drinking,
and with all the carnall company of women. 3. When you travell walk
moderately and overheat not your ſelf, neither ſleep in the day time,
but moderately in the night, avoid as much as you may inordinate
watching.




CHAP. 42.

  _A ſoverain powder againſt the venome of the Plague, fit
  for Princes and Rich people._


Take Saphire Hiacinthe Smaragdus, of one or two or of all of theſe one
dram, of pearls bole Armoniack of the beſt, with the ſeeds of Oxaliſe
of each of theſe two drams, of the ſcrapings of Ivory two ſcruples
of Unicorns horn one ſcruple, of the ſeed of Ocinum, half a ſcruple,
yellow or red Sanders Agalocchi or Xilaloes of the beſt, Doronicie,
Cinamon, exquiſite Saffone of each three grains ſix grains of Muſk,
make of theſe a fine powder, and leave out the muſk for them that love
it not, the uſe of the ſaid powder and others that follow ſhall be
declared hereafter if God permit.




CHAP. 43.

  _How to make a powder for the poorer ſort of people._


Take two drams of bole Armoniack with three drams of the Seeds of
Oxalis, Aloes Epeticum Lotum, and Red Corrall of each of theſe a dram,
the powder of Diatrio Santalon, eight ſcruples with the pills of dry
Oringes, Cloves Cinamon and Saffone of each of theſe five drams, make
of theſe a fine powder, you may uſe the ſame with conſerves or without
them, with ſirrups or with diſtilled waters, but much rather with juces
and ſuch convenient licquors as is before named.




CHAP. 44.

  _How with little coſt to make a drink for the poor._


Take of the powder preſcribed for the Poor, Conditiroſatie, or conſerve
of Roſes, Condii boraginis, or rather Coraginis of each a dram and
a half two ounces of the Suck of Oxalis, two ounces Succi avantii
Coragares extract with Roſe water and of good white wine vineger of
each an ounce and make thereof a drink.




CHAP. 45.

  _A drink that hath been proved good againſt the Plague._


Take two drams of the powder of Mugwort of the firſt and ſecond ſort,
the ſeeds of Sanctie or of Oringes, of Mirrhe of each a dram, the
ſcrapings of Harts horn a dram, beat them well and mixe them together,
you muſt drink this of white vineger before a fire and as ſoon as there
appeareth any ſwelling in the groine or flank, or under the Armpits,
or any where elſe the remedy muſt be ready, for the medicine provoketh
great ſweat whereby the venome or infection avoideth every part. The
patient thus ſweating by the fire his infected ſweat muſt be rubed and
dried with hot linnen cloathes, which muſt be always changed untill the
ſavour of the ſweat be gone with rubbing.




CHAP. 46.

  _How opiate is made._


Take of the firſt or ſecond powder Oringe pills conſerved of each an
ounce and a half, the conſerve of Roſes the conſerve of Bugloſs, two
ounces of each of the ſirrup of the juce of Cittorns Oringes or Lemons
or elſe of Oxalis, or Omphacini, ſufficient make of it a licquid
Electuary in form of an Opiate, whereof take an ounce or more and drink
ſome of the foreſaid liquors and ſuch as here follow, you may mingle an
ounce of purſlane with the ſaid liquor.




CHAP. 47.

  _How to make a drink meat after the taking of Opiate, or
  to be mixed with the Opiate for the ſtrongeſt or meaneſt
  men according to the time and place._


To do this take the juce of Cittorne or Lemons three ounces of the wine
of ſwore Oringes with good white and clear vineger and Roſe water of
each of theſe an ounce and mixe theſe all together.




CHAP. 48.

  _How to make a good drink for the poor._


Take three ounces of the juce of Sorrell that is very clear of bitter
and ſwore oringes, with white and clear vineger and Roſe water of each
of theſe an ounce make thereof a drink, mixe it with a little ſuger to
make it pleaſant.




CHAP. 49.

  _How to make a drink to cauſe one to ſweat._


Take a dram of good Triacle, or a dram of Mithridatum, with bole
Armoniack of the beſt of the powder of one of the herbs called
Cardiacee, deſcribed before, half a dram, Scabius water two ounces,
water of Oxaliſe, Bugloſs Borage of each an ounce and make a drink
thereof.




CHAP. 50.

  _How to make a drink eaſie for the poor of low price._


Take the decoction of Scabius, and of the flowers of red pop ge a
glaſs full with a little ſuger or a little white vineger, or a ptiſane,
made with barley and Aniſeeds and the roots of Parſley the roots of
Suckrey the one or the other decoction with ſharp ſirrup two ounces or
a little white vineger. You muſt underſtand that theſe foreſaid drinks
be taken hot, the patient being well covered in his bed the Triacle and
Mithridate although they be of great efficacy yet are they not meet
for women with childe nor for young children, the uſe of them ought
not to be often nor in great quantities, when the Fevor is great, ſome
mens advice is to mingle the medicine for ſweating with ſome diſtilled
water or with the decoction of herbs, concerning the part to which
the venomous matter hath its courſe, now if a man knoweth that the
mater goeth to the head, let the patient take it with ſome diſtilled
waters or with the decoction Bitony, but if it go to the vital parts,
or to the breſt and heart, with the water of the decoction of Borage,
which is very Bugloſs, if it go to the belly and bowels with liquor of
wormwood, if to the Liver, then with the decoction water of Egrimony
which is the true and Real Zupatorium.




CHAP. 51.

  _How to provoke ſweat and heal the Plague._


Take of the herb called Rape, with the roots of the leſſer Planton and
knot graſs of each half a handfull bray them well and boyle them in
vineger then ſtrain them through a linnen cloath, give the ſick perſon
of this to drink when he goeth to bed it will cauſe him to ſweat out
all the ill humers.




CHAP. 52.

  _An excellent preſervative againſt the Plague._


Take one ounce of the juce of green nuts, half an ounce of the juce
of Agrimony, three drams of the juce of Rue, three ounces of the juce
of Iſſope four ounces of the juce of hemp mingle them altogether,
then take half an ounce of the ſaid mixture with half a dram of mumea
and half an ounce of Suger Candy and one dram of ſuger of Roſes, an
Electuary thereof and diſſolve the quantity of a Cheſtnut of it in good
wine and drink thereof when you riſe and when you go to bed.




CHAP. 53.

  _Another againſt the Plague._


Take of the roots of Turmentill finely powdered, one dram with half a
dram of Triacle diſſolve it in ſorrell water and give it the diſeaſed.




CHAP. 54.

  _How to make another preſervative againſt the Plague._


Take two egges and make a hole upon the top of each of them, then take
out the whites put into them ſo much whole Safforne as will half fill
up the egge to the middle, cover them with other egge ſhells boyl
them till they become red, then bray them with all the ſhells, and
put thereunto of white Diptamue and Turmevill of each three drams of
vomiting nuts one dram and a half of the ſeeds of Rockit the quantity
of the beaten eggs bray them all together the ſecond time, then put
thereunto of good Triacle the weight of the other things except the
eggs and make an electuary of the which give two drams in the morning
when the patient riſeth before he goes to labour.




CHAP. 55.

  _Another preſervative againſt the Plague._


Take Safforne of Setwell, of Turmentill of Diptamus of each of theſe
one ounce of Triacle of Mithridate of ſuger of Bugloſs of each eight
drams with the ſirrup of the pills of pomecitterns, make a electuary of
the which to preſerve the party, according to his age, if he be above
the age of fifteen years give him two drams in the morning before meat
with white wine, and after it give him two Maſtick Coriander ſeeds,
if he be but 14 years of age give him but one dram, and a half being
under the age of 8 years give him one dram, when he goeth out of the
houſe let him hold in his mouth a little of the electuary; in the
curing the plague the foreſaid confection muſt be given as ſoon as he
feeleth himſelf to have the Ague, within the ſpace of 24 hours with the
which the water of Sumak, the quantity aforeſaid according unto age,
it helpeth all cold infirmities or griefs, miniſtred with wine or with
Aquavitæ having firſt made the univerſall Remedies of purging letting
of blood and ſuch like.




CHAP. 56.

_How to make a good water againſt the Plague or Surfeite._


Take Red ſage, Celendine Roſemary, Herbgraſs Wormwood Mugwort,
Pimpernell, Dragons, Scabius Tyromony, Roſaſolis, and Balm, of each of
theſe a handfull or like quantity by weight, waſh and ſwing them in a
linnen cloth, ſhred them and put them into a galon of white wine with
a quarter of an ounce of Gentian roots, and of Angelica roots the like
quantity let it ſtand two days and two nights cloſe covered and diſtill
it at your pleaſure that glaſs in which you keep it be ſtopt very cloſe.




CHAP. 57.

  _How to purifie the Air in a Plague time._


Take an ounce of balſum, one ounce of the flower of Sulpher with an
ounce of mirrhe powder, all theſe together put thereto as much perno as
will make them into a ſtiffe paſt then make it into little cakes then
in the time of a peſtilence every day or every other day put one or two
of theſe upon a chafing diſh of coals this is good ſaith mine Author to
purifie the Air.


_FINIS._


       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES.


1. Chap 16: "waſh it with Whine wine that is very ſtrong..." changed to
"waſh it with White wine that is very ſtrong."

2. Chap 50: "and of the flowers of red pop ge a..." changed to "and of
the flowers of red poppy."

3. Preface: "[Illustrated drop-cap: I] _Through Gods divine
providence,..." The first word [Through] changed to lower-case;
"[Illustrated drop-cap: I] _through Gods divine providence,..."

3. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

4. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
errors.

5. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.

6. Format of headings Chapters 41‒57 changed to standardise with
Chapters 1‒40.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Collection of Seven and Fifty
approved Receipts Good against , by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTION OF SEVEN AND FIFTY RECEIPTS ***

***** This file should be named 61703-0.txt or 61703-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/7/0/61703/

Produced by Brian Wilsden and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
made using scans of public domain works put online by
Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
